--- 
title: "An idea worth believing in: Hire people who know why they work, not why they want to work for you."
description: "I would rather hire someone who self identifies with their work over someone who simply tries to describe what they think the job is about."
date: 2011-02-10 
published: true
tags: hiring
--- 

I've done a lot of phone interviewing lately so the subject of
what makes a good hire has been on my mind. At the beginning of an
interview I always ask a few warm up questions to get the candidate
calmed down and talking to me. Asking a candidate why they want to work
at the company is a typical warmup question, but the more important
distinction is why do they want to work at all? The best candidates
already have an understanding about what they're doing in software
engineering, and it usually goes something like this: I want to solve
problems, and can do so by programming. Candidates who believe in their
ability to solve problems are exactly the kind of people I want to work
with, because this kind of thinking manifests itself in a variety of
other amazing traits.

Positive consequences of self-realization
-----------------------------------------

When someone already knows why they're showing up the conversation
naturally shifts away from the person and towards the challenge. There's
a catalyzing effect when people focus on a common goal - gone is the
need to carve out a role for everyone; instead everyone is a problem
solvers with the same role, and we share an outcome. Working with people
who are already comfortable in the role of a problem solver means nobody
is wasting energy trying to avoid work that's "not my job". The job is
solving problems, which means anything that moves the team forward is
fair game. When you're fortunate enough to work on a team that "clicks"
in this way, it's because you've hired a group of people who already
believe in what they're doing - no effort is required to convince them.
And the best part: they're confident as hell. Have you ever worked on a
project with someone who clearly doesn't belive that the problem can be
solved? They're extremely disagreeable, pointlessly argumentative, and
resistive to change. These people are missing the second half of the
equation: they don't think programming can solve the problem. Being a
software engineer means having confidence, sometimes irrationally so in
the ability to solve problems through software. People with this
confidence are willing to take on big challenges others will walk away
from and instead make a difference. They'll also take failure in stride
because they've bought in on the idea that a failure doesn't mean the
problem is impossible. Working with people this focused is pleasurable,
especially if you share the vision of success.

How can we hire these people?
-----------------------------

One of my favorite questions to ask a candidate is this: "If I gave you
a year to work on anything you wanted to, what would it be?" I find this
an extremely telling question about people's motivations. I've heard a
ton of different responses, but there are 3 groupings that I find are
common:

1.  **No clue what they would do** - There's a large group of people who
    are completely shocked by the question. They're silent for a few
    seconds then say something like "That's a good question" or, "You
    know I'm not really sure, I have a lot of interests". I'm always
    worried that these people have never posed the question to
    themselves: what am I doing here? When I'm about to hire somebody
    I'll be working with, I sure hope the answer doesn't turn out to be
    "ice fishing in Alaska" because I don't see that being a great
    match.
2.  **Whatever you want me to do** - The next big group didn't even hear
    the question, they heard "what do you think I want you to be
    interested in for me to hire you?". This group will usually clarify
    with "you mean what I want to do at \*insert company name here\*?"
    or my favorite "I want to work on a large e-commerce platform". Some
    area a little better and give me a vague field of study: "I would
    work on something with a lot of data, to make it more efficient". My
    largest concern with this group is that they're not thinking about
    problem solving. They're still focused on defining a personal
    identity, they're "the engineer who works on big ass data problems",
    or "the front end specialist"... that person will be a nightmare to
    work with when everyone needs to pitch in and migrate all our
    services to the latest version of FizBang package. They're often the
    first ones to identify work as beneath them.
3.  **I've got a laundry list of problems I'd like to take a crack at
    solving** - These are the engineers I'm looking for. This kind of
    person will talk about personal projects, or say something awesome
    like "You know, I've never found a good website for keeping track of
    my bicycle trips, I've always wanted to write something that will
    let me map out my route and tell me about...." or "I' really hate
    how hard it is to use FlimFlam library, I've always thought it could
    be easier if they just changed it to...". This group has a problem
    solving mindset, and they're applying programming skills to the
    issues at hand. If you've got a candidate that's thinking about how
    to solve problems outside of work it's a solid indicator that
    they've made peace with the role of problem solver.

There are of course other questions, but I think this one is
particularly good because it's so open-ended. It really gives people all
the walking room they'd ever want, but what we're really looking for is
the person who stays on message. It tells us that in a world of
possibilities, this person is following their passion.

What's the answer for other job roles?
--------------------------------------

I've told you what I think the answer is for a software engineer, but
what about all the other roles? If a manager know's why they work,
what's the answer we want to hear? How about from a DBA, or a program
manager? Can we all distill our job titles down the their essence and
arrive at the important question of why? I hope so, because it's a lot
more fun to work with people who can answer that question instead of
"why I like a paycheck".
