--- 
title: "Thoughts on Delegation"
published: true 
popular: true
date: 2012-01-24
tags: management, delegation
--- 
You manage people, you’re busy all the time, and there is more work
expected of you than you could possibly get done. You’ll need to give
some of this work to others if you want to be successful. But delegating
work is trickier than one might suppose. For new managers, the anal
retentive, and lesser forms of perfectionism, it can be very difficult
to let go of control and place your trust in the team. Let’s look at
delegation done wrong, delegation done correctly, and how to get
comfortable with giving work to others. 
## When delegation goes bad
Let’s pretend you’re already good at delegating work. Not just good at
it but REALLY good at it, you’re the Steve Jobs of getting other people
to do work for you (OK, Steve Jobs was the Steve Jobs of getting others
to do work for him, but maybe you’re whoever the next guy is). Once
comfortable with delegation, the risk often becomes overuse. You no
longer fill out spreadsheets, go to informational meetings, or
prioritize the team’s backlog of work; instead you’ve becoming a sea
lamprey. For those not in the know, a sea lamprey is a parasitic
creature that sucks onto a fish and basically enjoys all the benefits of
the fish’s efforts without doing a god damn thing. If you use your
delegation skills too much, others quickly begin to see you as a
consumer of resources, rather than a provider. If the team thinks of you
as a remorseless drain, next comes resentment and a loss of respect. And
since respect is really the only long term form of control you have on a
team (we’ll talk about that some other time) it’s probably not worth
losing it just so you can get back an hour of your day. 

[![Reporting to
2 managers is such a
drag](http://andytroutman.com/wordpress/wp-content/uploads/2012/01/lamprey-managers-300x187.jpg "Reporting to 2 managers is such a drag")](http://andytroutman.com/wordpress/wp-content/uploads/2012/01/lamprey-managers.jpg)

*Reporting to 2 managers is a drag...* 

You can’t delegate everything and
expect people to respect you for it, knowing when it make sense to
delegate work is an important aspect of the skill. 

## Delegating Correctly 
Done correctly, delegation becomes a mutually satisfying
process. For this to work, stay mindful of the kind of work you’re
asking others to do. You can usually delegate two kinds of tasks without
much complaining:

1. Opportunities
2. Tasks your team is better equipped for

Opportunities come in a variety of flavors, they can be to learn a new
skill, advance one’s career, try out aspects of a different job role,
and many others. Giving people work which gives them a chance to
demonstrate excellence can be empowering, nobody ever calls a sea
lamprey that. When you delegate work that you think is an opportunity,
be explicit and don’t expect people to intrinsically understand the
importance. Here’s how to ask Samantha for help with the team’s roadmap
document: “Samantha, I know you’ve been interested in moving into
management so I thought having you write the first draft of our
quarterly roadmap would be a good opportunity for you to experience part
of the job. What do you think?”. Samantha is likely to not feel dumped
on by this kind of offer. You’ve provided her with an option that is
mutually beneficial to both of you, keeping the relationship on even
footing while still asking her to do work for you. When the work clearly
isn’t an opportunity, don’t make the mistake of pitching it as such.
*You know what would be great opportunity? Calculating how much hardware
we’re going to need next year*. This will come off as disingenuous, and
make people feel better about putting soap in your coffee. Instead of
trying to dress up the work, flatter someone by admitting that they have
the expertise to do the best job. Most people want to help out, and
everyone likes to hear that they’re valued. Just like when providing an
opportunity, don’t miss the chance to explain why you’re asking them to
do the work. Show them that the decision isn’t arbitrary- you’re
counting on the individual to save everybody effort because they can do
the best job. Why do these forms of delegation work when other’s don’t?
What’s the difference between “providing an opportunity” and “giving
someone work to do”? It has to do with the position of authority; in
both cases above, we removed ourselves from a dictatorial role. In the
classic [Milgram
experiments](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Milgram_experiment "Milgram Experiments"),
there was one way to guarantee that the experimenters did not continue
forward, and that was to tell them: “You have no other choice, you must
go on.” 100% of the test subjects, when told that they didn’t have a
choice reacted by choosing not to move forward. So too will it go for
the manager who foists work on to people arbitrarily; or worst results,
make people feel like they don’t have a choice and you’ll get the kind
of reaction you deserve. 

## Being comfortable with delegation
If we understand that delegation is less about making demands of others and
more about creating mutually beneficial situations, the process should
no longer feel disingenuous. For others, delegation is difficult because
of the perceived loss of control. It’s hard to ask others to do things,
especially when we feel as if we can do a better job. There is also a
question of attribution: How can I take credit for another’s work?
Aren’t I back to being the sea lamprey? Well, if you’re sincerely taking
credit for others work then yes, you are. Remember that when you
delegate work you’re no longer taking credit for the work, you’re taking
credit for delegating work. Delegation is a valued skill, one that
allows you to extend your influence beyond the self and accomplish
things you would otherwise never find time to do. This is invaluable to
being a good manager, staying mindful of this will help you to see the
value in delegation. Give others credit for the good work they do and
keep the credit of identifying them as someone who could do the work for
yourself. While you’ve lost claim to the work, you haven’t lost
ownership of the outcome. Getting comfortable with letting others do
work is an important part of growing as a manager. If you’re having
trouble letting go, remember that you still own the final outcome. The
manager sets the bar for quality, defines the expected results, and
decides when they’ve been met. Put it like this, it hardly feels like
delegation is a loss of control at all. Get the best results from others
when they feel like you’ve defined success but given them the chance to
achieve it. Keeping this kind of perspective can help even the most
micro of managers to let go of the work, provided they can trust their
employees. In order to delegate well you need to have trust in your
employee’s ability to deliver. If you still can’t let go, then start the
process with small focused deliverables. Initially, don’t delegate work
that you’re not prepared to do yourself. Be sure to give plenty of lead
time, and avoid hurt feeling by making the deliverable to you, and not
to someone else. This gives you cover to use or discard whatever you get
without making people feel like they failed you. Depending on the
person’s experience with the task, be prepared to change your level of
engagement from hands-off all the way to working side-by-side. Once you
have a better understanding of your employee’s strengths and weaknesses,
delegation becomes easier. Done correctly, delegation is a mutually
beneficial proposition. It allows the manager to accomplish a broader
agenda while empowering the team. Keep mindful of how you’re presenting
new work to others; focus on buy in, and go get some work done.
